# Introduction #
This project provides several tools for ontology based data access (OBDA) in the [OWL 2 QL profile](http://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-profiles/#OWL_2_QL). At the moment, we support a subset of OWL 2 QL, namely DL-Lite\_R. The theoretical foundations of this work can be found in this ISWC 2013 [paper](http://www.informatik.uni-bremen.de/tdki/research/papers/2013/LuSeyToWo-ISWC13.pdf). The paper also explains how exactly we modified the original LUBM data generator and the ontology.

The project consists of the following tools.

## Combo ##

Combo implements the filtering approach to OBDA, which is a novel technique based on the combined approach. The basic idea of the combined approach to query answering in the presence of ontologies is to materialize the consequences of the ontology in the data and then use a limited form of query rewriting to deal with infinite materializations. While this approach is efficient and scalable for ontologies that are formulated in the basic version of the description logic DL-Lite, it incurs an exponential blowup during query rewriting when DL-Lite is extended with the popular role hierarchies. In the filtering approach, this query rewriting step is replaced with a call to a procedure that filters out spurious tuples. This is natural from an implementation perspective and allows us to handle role hierarchies without an exponential blowup.

Combo delegates the materialization and query answering tasks to a relational database management system (RDBMS). As a consequence, ontologies must be first loaded into the RDBMS in a suitable format. We chose to implement the filtering procedures as user-defined functions (UDFs) in the RDBMS. This allows us to take advantage of the optimizations for UDFs in the underlying RDBMS.

The following is what Combo does for you.
  * Given a DL-Lite\_R ontology (TBox and ABox), it generates a bulk load file that you can directly load into the RDBMS. You do not need to worry about the database schema, Combo will take care of that for you.
  * Materialize the consequences of the TBox w.r.t. the ABox, i.e., complete the data.
  * Given a conjunctive query (CQ), generate a SQL query and a filter procedure that together return all the correct answers of the original CQ w.r.t. to the ontology. Note that this query should be issued over the completed data.
  * Given a non-recursive Datalog program that is generated by query rewriting systems such as [Rapid](http://www.image.ece.ntua.gr/~achort/rapid/rapid.zip) and Presto, generate a SQL query that returns all the answers of the program over the original data. In this respect, you can use Combo to load ontologies into an RDBMS and check how fast the rewritings generated by traditional systems are executed.
  * Management of several ontologies in the RDBMS, i.e., ability to store and ask queries to original and completed versions of several ontologies.

## EUGen ##

The Extended University Data Generator is a data generator for benchmarking OBDA reasoners. It extends the [Univ-Bench Artificial Data Generator (UBA) V1.7](http://swat.cse.lehigh.edu/projects/lubm/) by features such as specifying the degree of incompleteness of the data and number of subject classes. It also provides an extension of the LUBM ontology that is compatible with the data generator and several queries for benchmarking.

# Acknowledgments #
This project is supported by DFG SFB/TR 8 "Spatial Cognition".